# Basic Shell Skills
## Understanding Commands
- The anatomy of a command:
	1. Command - `ls`
	2. Options - `-l`
	3. Arguments `/etc`

There are 3 kinds of commands:
1. Alias - Command that the user can define as needed. 
2. Internal Command - Command that is part of the shell itself and does not have to be loaded separately.  
3. External Command - Command that exists as an executable file on the disk of the computer. To find external commands, use the `$PATH` variable.
## Use Input-Output Redirection 


- \> (same as 1\>) - Redirects STDOUT. If redirection is to a file, the current contents of
- \>\> (same as 1\>\>) - Redirects STDOUT. If output is written to a file, the output is
- 2> - Redirects STDERR.
- 2>&1 - Redirects STDERR to the same destination as STDOUT. Notice that this has to be used in combination with normal output redirection, as in ls whuhiu > errout 2>&1.
- < (same as 0<) - Redirects STDIN.

## History 
- !number - Execute a command with a specific number from history.
- !sometext -  Execute the last command that starts with `sometext`. Notice that this is a potentially dangerous command because the command that was found is executed immediately! 
- history -c - Clear history completely

 ## Vim
  Vim has two modes:
  1. Command Mode
  2. Input Mode

- **Esc** - Switches from input mode to command mode. Press this key before typing any command.
- **i, a** - Switches from command mode to input mode at (i) or after (a) the current cursor position.
- **o** - Opens a new line below the current cursor position and goes to input mode
- **:wq**-  Writes the current file and quits.
- **:q!** - Quits the file without applying any changes. The ! forces the command to do its work. Add the ! only if you really know what you are doing.
- **:w** {filename}Writes the current file with a new filename. 
-  *dd* - Deletes the current line.  
- **yy** - Copies the current line.  
- **p** - Pastes the current selection.
- **v** - Enters visual mode, which allows you to select a block of text using the arrow keys. Use d to cut the selection or y to copy it.
- **Ctrl -r** - Undoes the last command. Repeat as often as necessary. Redoes the last undo.  
- **gg** - Goes to the first line in the document.  
- **G** - Goes to the last line in the document.
- **/text** - Searches for text from the current cursor position forward.
- **?text** - Searches for text from the current cursor position backward.
- **^** - Goes to the first position in the current line.
- **$** - Goes to the last position in the current line.
- **!ls** - Adds the output of ls (or any other command) in the current file.
- **:%s/old/new/g** - Replaces all occurrences of old with new.

## Environment Configuration Files

| File              | Explanation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| ----------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `/etc/profile `   | This is the generic file that is processed by **all** users upon login. It is executed when you first log in. This file provides values for your path in addition to setting environment variables for such things as the location of your mailbox and the size of your history files. Finally, /etc/profile gathers shell settings from configuration files in the /etc/profile.d directory. |
| `/etc/bashrc`     | This file is processed when sub-shells are started. This executes for every user who runs the bash shell each time a bash shell is opened. It sets the default prompt and may add one or more aliases. Values in this file can be overridden by information in each user’s ~/.bashrc file.                                                                                                    |
| `~/.bash_profile` | In this file, user-specific login shell variables can be defined. This is used by each user to enter info that is specific to his or her use of the shell. It is executed only once-- when the user logs in.                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| `~/.bashrc`       | In this user-specific file, subshell variables can be defined. This contains the information that is specific to your bash shells. It is read when you log in and also each time you open a new bash shell. This is the best location to add aliases so that your shell picks them up.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

# Login vs subshell
- Login Shell - The first shell that is opened for a user after the user has logged in.
- Subshell - From the login shell, a user may run scripts, which will start a subshell of that login shell.

### Displaying Messages During Login
- /etc/motd - Messages in /etc/motd display after a user has successfully logged in to a shell. (Note that users in a graphical environment do not see its contents after a graphical login.) Using /etc/motd can be a convenient way for system administrators to inform users about an issue or a security policy, for example.
- /etc/issue - The contents of this file display before the user logs in. Using this file provides an excellent means of specifying specific login instructions to users who are not logged in yet.

## Finding Help
### man

The most helpful parts of a man page are at the bottom. You will find actual examples, and the **See Also** section. 

Use `man -k` to search the mandb. To update the mandb, just type ``mandb

Man pages are categorized in different sections.
- 1: Executable programs or shell commands
- 5: File formats and conventions
- 8: System Admin Commands



# Lab
1.  Modify your shell environment so that on every subshell that is started, a variable is set. The name of the variable should be COLOR, and the value should be set to red. Verify that it is working.
	1. `export COLOR=red` to ~/.bashrc
	2. Create a script that echos $COLOR, and the output should be `RED`
2.  Use the appropriate tools to find the command that you can use to set the system time 1 minute ahead.
	1. `man -k time |grep set`
3.  From your home directory, type the command `ls -al wergihl *` and ensure that errors as well as regular output are redirected to a file with the name `/tmp/lsoutput`.
	1. `ls -al dkjsdk* &> /tmp/lsoutput`
4. Locate the man page that shows how to set a password.
	1. `man -k passwd`
5. Use globbing and `ls` to show all files in /etc that have a number in their name.
	1. `ls -ld  *[0-9]*
6. Use `ls -l` to display the results page by page.
