# Understanding The Root User

# Working on Local Consoles
### Console vs Terminal 
A console is the environment the user is looking at. A terminal is an environment that is opened on the consoles and provides access to a text shell.
You can have multiple terminals open on a console, but you cannot have multiple consoles open in a terminal. 

## Working with Multiple Terminals 
Virtual terminals allow you to open six different terminal windows from the same console at the same time and navigate between them. Use `Alt-F1` through `Alt-F6`
-   F1: Gives access to the GNOME Display Manager (GDM) graphical login
-   F2: Provides access to the current graphical console
-   F3: Gives access back to the current graphical session
-   F4–F6: Gives access to nongraphical consoles

## Pseudo Terminal Devices
For terminal windows that are started from a graphical environment, pseudo terminals are started. These pseudo terminals are referred to using numbers in the /dev/pts directory. So, the first terminal window that is started from a graphical environment appears as /dev/pts/1, the second terminal windows appears as /dev/pts/2, and so on.

## Booting Rebooting, and Shutting Down Systems

To issue a proper reboot, you have to alert the Systemd process. To tell the Systemd process this has to happen, you can use a few commands:
-   `systemctl reboot` or `reboot`
-   `systemctl halt` or `halt`
-   `systemctl poweroff` or `poweroff`

>[!WARNING] To force a machine restart, run  `echo b > /proc/syrq-trigger`  This should only be used as a last resort. 

# Using SSH and Related Utilities
[How SSH Works](https://medium.com/@hellomudit/understanding-ssh-workflow-66a0e8d4bf65#:~:text=SSH%20establishes%20a%20cryptographically%20secured,to%20secure%20transmission%20of%20information.)
The ssh port is 22. On the remote server, the sshd service MUST be running. 

## Securely Transferring Files

To transfer files, you can use, `scp`, `rsync`, or `sftp`.

#### SCP

**Copy the /etc/hosts file to the /tmp directory on server2**
`scp /etc/hosts server2: /tmp`

**Copy an entire subdirectory.** 
`scp -r server2:/etc/ /tmp`

#### SFTP

#### RSYNC
The rsync command uses SSH to synchronize files between a remote directory and a local directory. The advantage of synchronizing files is that only differences need to be considered. So, for example, if you synchronize a 100-MiB file in which only a few blocks have changed since the previous sync, only the changed blocks will be synchronized. This approach is also known as a delta sync.

### Key Based Authentication for SSH
When using public/private key-based authentication, the user who wants to connect to a server generates a public/private key pair. The private key needs to be kept private and will never be distributed. The public key is stored in the home directory of the target user on the SSH server in the file .ssh/authorized_keys.

### The Screen Command
>[!TIP] This is not on the exam. 

The screen command is particularly useful when used from an SSH session. You can start a task that takes a long time from a screen session, detach from it, and attach to it later. The command continues running, even if you are going home and shut down your computer. The next day, you can easily attach to the screen session again to complete the task.