# Understanding Different User Types

In regards to security, you are either a privileged or unprivileged.  

| Command | Explanation |
| ------- | ----------- |
| id      | Get info about a user account            |

### Using su
`su` allows you to open a subshell as another user. `su - ` opens a login shell and gives you access to their actual environment 

### Sudo
If a non-root user needs to perform a specific system administration task, the user does not need root access; instead, the system administrator can configure `sudo` to give that user administrator permissions to perform the specific task.

#### How to add a user to the wheel group?
1.  Make the administrative user account a member of the group wheel by using `usermod -aG wheel user`.
2.  Type visudo and make sure the line %wheel ALL=(ALL) ALL is included.

# Managing User Accounts
## System vs Normal Accounts

- Normal Accounts - The average user on the server. 
- System Accounts - These are used by the services on the host. 

Properties for both of these accounts are stores in `/etc/passwd` and `/etc/shadow`. 

### Home Directories
When creating home directories (which happens by default while you’re creating users), the content of the “skeleton” directory is copied to the user home directory. The skeleton directory is `/etc/skel`, and it contains files that are copied to the user home directory at the moment this directory is created. These files will also get the appropriate permissions to ensure that the new user can use and access them.


## Managing User Properties
Use `usermod` to modify user properties. When you’re working with tools such as `useradd`, some default values are assumed. These default values are set in two configuration files:
1. `/etc/login.defs `
	1. `MOTD_FILE:` Defines the file that is used as the “message of the day” file. In this file, you can include messages to be displayed after the user has successfully logged in to the server.
	2. `ENV_PATH`: Defines the $PATH variable, a list of directories that should be searched for executable files after logging in.
	3. `PASS_MAX_DAYS`, `PASS_MIN_DAYS`, and `PASS_WARN_AGE`: Define the default password expiration properties when creating new users.
	4. `UID_MIN`: Indicates the first UID to use when creating new users.
	5. `CREATE_HOME`: Indicates whether or not to create a home directory for new users.
2. `/etc/default/useradd`

## Password Properties
You can use 2 commands to change password properties for users.
1. chage
	1. Use `chage -l` to see current password management settings.
	2. `chage {username}` to enter an interactive mode.  
2. passwd

```bash
# Set the password for the user linda to a minimal usage period of 30 days and an expiry after 90 days, where a warning is generated 3 days before expire.
passwd -n 30 -w 3 -x 90 linda
```


## Creating a User Environment 

| File         | Explanation                                                            |
| ------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `/etc/profile` | Used for default settings for all users when starting a login shell    |
| `/etc/bashrc`  | Used to define defaults for all users when starting a subshell         |
| `~/.profile`   | -   Specific settings for one user applied when starting a login shell |
| `~/.bashrc `            |     Specific settings for one user applied when starting a subshell                |

# Creating and Managing Group Accounts

## Understanding Linux Groups 
Linux users can be a member of two different kinds of groups:
1. **Primary** - Every user must be a member of the primary group, and there is only one primary group. When you’re creating files, the primary group becomes group owner of these files. The user’s primary group membership is defined in `/etc/passwd`; the group itself is stored in the /etc/group configuration file.
2. **Secondary** - A user can be a member of a secondary group in addition to the primary group. Secondary groups are important to get access to files. If the group a user is a member of has access to specific files, the user will get access to those files also.

## Creating Groups

### Creating groups With vigr
With the vigr command, you open an editor interface directly on the /etc/group configuration file. In this file, groups are defined in four fields per group:
1. `Group Name`
2. `Group Password`
3.` Group ID`
4. `Members`

### Creating groups With groupadd
Just use `groupadd` followed by the name of the group you want to add. There are some advanced options; the only significant one is `-g`, which allows you to specify a group ID when creating the group.

## Managing Group Properties
 | Command     | Explanation                                                         |
 | ----------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
 | groupmod    | Change the name or group ID of the group.                           |
 | usermod -aG | Add users to new groups that will be used as their secondary group. |
 | groupmems            |            allows a user to administer their own group membership list without the requirement of superuser privileges

# Lab
-   Create two groups: sales and account.
	- `groupadd` group name
-   Create users bob, betty, bill, and beatrix. Make sure they have their primary group set to a private group that has the name of the user
	- `for user in bob betty bill beatrix; do useradd $user; done` 
-   Make bob and betty members of the group sales, and bill and beatrix members of the group account.
	- `usermod -aG {GROUP} {USER}`
-   Set a password policy that requires users to change their password every 90 days.
	- `vim /etc/login.defs`