# Managing File Ownership
### Displaying Ownership
Every file and directory has two owners.
1. user
2. group

When a user creates a file or directory, they become the owner. 
#### How does the shell check ownership of a file or directory?

1.  The shell checks whether you are the user owner of the file you want to access, which is also referred to as the user of the file. If you are the user, you get the permissions that are set for the user, and the shell looks no further.
2.  The shell checks whether you have obtained any permissions through user-assigned ACLs. If this is the case, these permissions are assigned and the shell looks no further.
3.  If you are not the user owner and did not get permissions through ACLs, the shell checks whether you are a member of the group owner, which is also referred to as the group of the file. If you are a member of the group, you get access to the file with the permissions of the group, and the shell looks no further.
4.  If you’ve come this far, the shell checks whether you have obtained any permissions through a group ACL. If that is the case, these permissions are applied, and the shell looks no further. If you are a member of multiple groups that have obtained permissions through ACLs, all of these permissions will apply.  
5.  If you are neither the user owner nor the group owner and have not obtained permissions through ACLs, you get the permissions of the others entity.

### Changing Ownership
Use `chown` to change ownership. To change linda's ownership on the account file, run `chown linda account` 

### Changing Group Ownership
There are two ways to do this:
1. chown
	1. `chown .account  /home/account` - Change group ownership of the account directory. 
2. chgrp
	1. `chgrp account /home/account`

### Default Ownership
When a user creates a file or directory, they become the owner, and the primary group of that user automatically becomes group owner.  If the user is a member of more groups, however, he can change the effective primary group so that new files will get the new primary group as group owner. They can do this by using the `newgrp` command. For example, if I wanted to change my primary group to sales, i would run `newgrp sales`. So now, every file/directory I create will be owned by the sales group. To set a group password, run `gpasswd`

# Managing Basic Permissions
## Understanding Read, Write, and Execute
| **Permission** | **Applied To Files**          | **Applied to Directories**     |
| ---------- | ------------------------- | -------------------------- |
| Read       | Open a file               | List contents of directory |
| Write      | Change contents of a file | Create and delete files    |
| Execute    | Run a program file        | Change to the directory    |

### Applying The Permissions
To apply the above permissions, use `chmod`. There are two modes for chmod
1. Absolute Mode - Use digits. Not my favorite 
2. Relative Mode - Use letters. My favorite 😈

| **Permission** | **Numeric Representation** |
| ---------- | ---------------------- |
| Read       | 4                      |
| Write      | 2                      |
| Execute    | 1                      |

>[!TIP] To set the execute permission to directories only, use an uppercase X. The uppercase X ensures that files will not get the execute permission unless the file has already set the execute permission for some of the entities.


# Advanced /Special Permissions
There are three advanced permissions. 
1. SUID(Set User ID)
2. SGID (Set Group ID)
3. Sticky Bit

### SUID
On some very specific occasions, you may want to apply this permission to executable files. By default, a user who runs an executable file runs this file with his own permissions. For normal users, that usually means that the use of the program is restricted. In some cases, however, the user needs special permissions, just for the execution of a certain task.  

> [!WARNING] This may look useful, but you could potentially be giving root permissions by accident.  Most of the time, you wont even have to use it. 


### SGID
> [!TIP] **Use Case**:  Linda and Lori work for the accounting department, and are both members of the group `accounting`. By default, these users are members of the private group of which they are the only member of. Both users, however, are members of the `accounting` group as well, but as a secondary group setting.  When either of them create a file, the primary group becomes the owner.  BUT, if we make a shared group directory and make sure that the SGID permission is applied to that directory , AND that the group `accounting` is set as the group owner for the directory, all files created in this directory and all its subdirectories also get the group accounting as the default group owner.


This is helpful for setting default group ownership on files and subdirectories. 

```bash
# Before setting the SGUID for the TAs group
[ana@RHCSA-MAIN tas]$ ll
-rw-r--r--. 1 ana ana 0 Jul 10 19:40 test

#After setting the SGUID on the TAs group
[ana@RHCSA-MAIN tas]$ ls -l
-rw-r--r--. 1 ana tas 0 Jul 10 20:15 test_after
```

As we can see before setting the SGUID, when ana creates a file `test`, the group owner of the file test is ana, but after setting the SGUID, the group owner of any file created will be `tas` which is the directory owner. 

### Sticky Bit
This permission is useful to protect files against accidental deletion in an environment where multiple users have write permissions in the same directory. If sticky bit is applied, a user may delete a file only if she is the user owner of the file or of the directory that contains the file. It is for that reason applied as a default permission to the /tmp directory, and it can be useful on shared group directories as well.

When you apply sticky bit, a user can delete files only if either of the following is true:
-   The user is owner of the file.
-   The user is owner of the directory where the file exists.


| Permisison | Numeric Value | Relative Value | On Files                                            | On Directories                                       |
| ---------- | ------------- | -------------- | --------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| SUID       | 4             | u+s            | User executes file with permissions of file owner.  A file with **SUID** always executes as the user who owns the file, regardless of the user passing the command.| n/A                                                  |
| SGID       | 2             | g+s            | User executes file with permissions of group owner. -   If set on a file, it allows the file to be executed as the **group** that owns the file (similar to SUID)|  If set on a directory, any files created in the directory will have their **group** ownership set to that of the directory owner |
| Sticky Bit | 1             | +t             | n/A                                                 | Prevents users from deleting files from other users.   Only the owner can delete files                                                  |

# ACLs

 Think of a scenario in which a particular user is not a member of group created by you but still you want to give some read or write access, how can you do it without making user a member of group, here comes in picture Access Control Lists, ACL helps us to do this trick. 

>[!TIP] What if you have an accounting intern (Kenny) who needs to be able to read certain files (or even just the files owned by Fred, his manager)? Or maybe people in the sales department also need access to the `accounting` owner’s files to create invoices for Fred’s team in order to bill customers, but you don’t want the sales team to see the other reports that Fred's team generates. This situation can be tricky because, with regular permissions, each file and directory can have only one user and group owner at a time.



### Preparing your File System for ACLs
ACLs allow us to apply a more specific set of permissions to a file or directory without (necessarily) changing the base ownership and permissions. They let us "tack on" access for other users or groups.

Benefits of ACLs
- You can give permissions to more than one user or group at a directory
- You can enable inheritance by working with default ACLs
>[!TIP] When setting ACLs, if you get the "operation not supported" message, you need to add the **acl** mount option in the /etc/fstab so that the file system will be mounted with ACL support by default. 

### Changing and Viewing ACL Settings
To set ACLs, use `setfacl`. To see current ACL settings, run `getfacl` . When using `ls`, ACLs are represented as a `+`. 

#### Group ACL
`setfacl -m g:sales:rx /dir`.In this command, -m indicates that the current ACL settings need to be modified. After that, `g:sales:rx` tells the command to set the ACL to read and execute (rx) for the group (g) sales. 

#### User ACL
`setfacl -m u:linda:rwx /data` gives permissions to user linda on the `/data` directory without making her the owner and without changing the current owner assignment.ACLs also allow you to take away permissions from users. For instance, `setfacl -m u:anna:- /tmp/myfile` would take away all permissions for user anna. This also will overwrite any permissions that the user may have obtained through the others entity.

ACLs also allow you to take away permissions from users. For instance, `setfacl -m u:anna:- /tmp/myfile` would take away all permissions for user anna. This also will overwrite any permissions that the user may have obtained through the others entity.
#acl

## Default ACLs
By setting a default ACL, you determine the permissions that will be set for all new items that are created in the directory.

>[!WARNING]  By setting a default ACL, you determine the permissions that will be set for all new items that are created in the directory.

>[!TIP] If you want to use ACLs to configure access for multiple users or groups to the same directory, you have to set ACLs twice. First, use setfacl -R -m to modify the ACLs for current files. Then, use setfacl -m d: to take care of all new items that will be created also.

How To Set a Default ACL?
Use the `-d` flag
- `setfacl -m d:g:sales:rx /data`

### Example
Let's say we have a producers, and writers group, but the writers need read access to everything in the producers directory. 

# Setting Default Permissions with umask
If you do not use ACLs, there is a shell setting that determines the default permissions that you will get: `umask`. Default permissions for a file are **666**. Default permissions for a directory are **777**. 
```bash
666 - 022 = 644
-rw-r--r--. 1 root   root      0 Jul  9 06:22 test1
6    4    4
```

So if we wanted to give every new file, read, read, and no permissions we'd run `umask  226`

```bash
666 - 226 = 440
-r--r-----. 1 root   root      0 Jul  9 06:26 test2
4   4   0
```

To make the default file permissions 777(NOT RECOMMENDED), run `umask 000`

Lab
- Ensure that others is denied default permissions to any file, linda creates
	- In linda's `.bash_profile` file, add `umask 007`
- Create a shred group directory structure `/data/profs` and `/data/students` that meets the following conditions:
	- Members of the groups have full `r` and `w` access to their directories, others has no permissions 
	
	- Files created in these directories are writable for all members of the group
		- `chmod 2770`
	- Users can only delete files they have created themselves
		- `chmod 3770 `
	- Members of group profs have read access to everything in `/data/students`
		- `setfacl -m d:g:profs:rx /data/students `
	- User `anna` is headmaster and should be able to delete everything in `/data/students` and `/data/profs`
		- `chown anna:students students/`
		- `chown anna:profs profs/`
