For everything that happens on a Linux server, a **process** is started. There are 3 process types:
1. **Shell Jobs** - Commands started from the command line. They are associated with the shell that was current when the process was started. These are also refereed to as *interactive processes*
2. **Daemons** - Processes that provide services. Usually started when the computer is booted.
4. **Kernel Threads** - These are a part of the linux kernel. You cannot manage these with common tools. When using `ps` these are identified with \[brackets\]

When a process is started, it can use multiple threads. A *thread* is a task started by a process and that s dedicated CPU can service. 

# Shell Jobs
To see a list of jobs, use `jobs` By default, an executed command starts in the foreground and quit when they are finished. If you know a job will take a long time to complete, start it with an ``&`` behind it. This will start it in the background to make room for other tasks to be started from the cli. To move the last job to the front, use `fg` . If a job takes much longer than predicted, use `Ctrl-Z` to temporarily stop the job. This pauses it, but does not remove it.

#### Ctrl D vs Ctrl C
Ctrl-D sends the end of file character to the current job. This job stops waiting for further input so that it can complete what it was currently doing.  When using Ctrl-C the job is just canceled, and nothing is closed properly


# Managing Shell Jobs
To get an overview of all current jobs, use the `jobs` command. 

### Managing Parent-Child Relations

When a process is started from a shell, it becomes a child process of that shell. All process started from a shell are terminated when th eshell is stopped. But, processes started in th background will NOT be killed when the parent shell from which they were starte dis killed.  To terminate these processes, use the `kill` command. 
>[!TIP] If a parent process is killed while the child process is still active, the child becomes a child of systemd

# Command Line Tools For Process Management
| Command | Explanation                           |
| ------- | ------------------------------------- |
| ps      | Show an overview of current processes |
| ps -ef        |                                       |
ps
ps -ef
ps fax
ps aux |grep dd 
pgrep dd


# Understanding Memory
Linux places as many files as possible in cache to guarantee fast access to the files. Because of this, linux shows as saturated. Swap is used as an overflow buffer of emulated RAM on disk. The Linux kernel moves inactive memory to swap first. 

# Adjusting Process Priority with nice
When linux processes are started, they are started with a priority of 20. Niceness generally ranges from -20 to 19, with -20 being the most favorable or highest priority for scheduling and 19 being the least favorable or lowest priority. Use `nice` and `renice` to adjust this priority. Why would you ever want to adjust niceness?
1. Backup jobs can be resource intensive, but most of the time don't need to be finished fast. You might want to start the job in a way that it doesn't annoy other processes. 
2. Say you want to start a very important calculation job. You might give it increased priority so that it can be handled as fast as possible, 
| Command | Explanation                               |
| ------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| nice    | Start a process with an adjusted priority |
| renice  | Change priority for current active process                                          |

```bash

#Using nice and renice

[ps aux | grep dd](<[root@RHCSA-MAIN etc]# nice -n 5 dd if=/dev/zero of=/dev/null &
[1] 12219

[root@RHCSA-MAIN etc]# ps aux |grep dd
root       12219 87.1  0.0 220992  1036 pts/3    RN   17:33   0:06 dd if=/dev/zero of=/dev/null

[root@RHCSA-MAIN etc]# renice -n 10 -p 12221

[root@RHCSA-MAIN etc]# renice -n 10 -p 12219
12219 (process ID) old priority 5, new priority 10

[root@RHCSA-MAIN etc]# ps aux |grep dd

root       12219 77.8  0.0 220992  1036 pts/3    RN   17:33   0:31 dd if=/dev/zero of=/dev/null
```

Use a `-` to increase priority and `+` tp decrease priority. 
>[! Warning] Never set priority to -20.

# Kill Killall and pkill
| Signal      | Explanation                     |
| ----------- | ------------------------------- |
| SIGTERM(15) | Used to ASK a process to stop   |
| SIGTERM(9)  | Used to FORCE a process to stop |
| SIGHUP (1)  | Used to HANG UP a process. The process will reread its config files. Like a restart.                                |

To send one of these signals, use `kill`.

# Managing Processes with Top

`top` gives an overview of the most active process currently running.  From top, you can also adjust process priority and kill processes.  Simply use `r` to renice or `k` to kill.

To get load averages, use the `uptime` command. Load averages are shown for the last 1,5,15 minutes. 
```bash
[root@RHCSA-MAIN etc]# uptime
 17:47:07 up  9:18,  1 user,  load average: 0.97, 1.03, 0.69
```



# Tuned 
Tuned is a daemon that monitors system activity and provides profiles. In these profiles, an admin can automatically tune a system for best possible latency, throughput or power consumption.  All you need to do is select the appropriate profile

| Command                          | Explanation                                         |
| -------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| tuned-adm list                   | Shows an overview of the current available profiles |
| tuned-adm profile {profile name} | Selects the profile                                 |

