# Cron
The cron service consists of 2  major components:
1. crond which is the cron daemon
2. Cron configuration which consists of multiple files working together to provide the right information to the right services at the right time. 
```bash

# Cron examples
* 11 * * * Every minute between 11:00 and 11:59 (probably not what you want)
0 11 * * 1-5 Every day at 11 a.m. on weekdays only
0 7-18 * * 1-5 Every hour at the top of the hour between 7 a.m. and 6 p.m. on weekdays
0 */2 2 12 5 Every two hours on the hour on December 2 and every Friday in December
```

The main config file is `/etc/crontab`. This is deprecated. Don't use this !  

Instead of modifying /etc/crontab, different cron configuration files are used:

- cron files are in `/etc/cron.d`
- Scripts in` /etc/cron.hourly`, `cron.daily`, `cron.weekly`, and `cron.monthly`
	- When putting scripts in this directory, exact times don't matter. All that matters is that they are executed, hourly, daily, weekly, and monthly.  The **anacron** service takes care of starting these. Config file is in `/etc/anacrontab`
- User-specific files that are created with `crontab -e`

### Cron Security
By default, all users can enter cron jobs. It is possible to limit which user is allowed to schedule cron jobs by using the /etc/cron.allow and /etc/cron.deny configuration files. If the cron.allow file exists, a user must be listed in it to be allowed to use cron. If the /etc/cron.deny file exists, a user must not be listed in it to be allowed to set up cron jobs. Both files should not exist on the same system at the same time. Only root can use cron if neither file exists.

# Configuring **at** to Schedule Future Tasks
The `atd` service is available for services that need to be executed **only once**. Use the `at` command followed by the time the job needs to be executed. This can be a specific time, as in at 14:00, but it can also be a time indication like at teatime or at noon. After you type this, the at shell opens. From this shell, you can type several commands that will be executed at the specific time that is mentioned. After entering the commands, press Ctrl-D to quit the at shell.
| Command | Explanation                                     |
| ------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| `atq`     | Get an overview of all jobs currently scheduled |
| `atm`     | Use this command to remove jobs                                                |


#cron