Most services on Linux write information to log files. There are 3 approaches that can be used to write logs:
1. Direct Write  -   Some services write logging information directly to the log files—even some important services such as the Apache web server and the Samba file server.
2. rsyslogd  -   rsyslogd is the enhancement of syslogd, a service that takes care of managing centralized log files. Because journald is not persistant between reboots, logs are forwarded here, which writes to different directories in `/var/log`
3. journald -   With the introduction of Systemd, the journald log service systemd- journald has been introduced also. This service is tightly integrated with Systemd, which allows administrators to read detailed information from the journal while monitoring service status using the systemctl status command. This can be queried using `journalctl`. This command enables yo to access a deep level of detail about messages that are logged.

>[!TIP] journald is NOT a replacement for rsyslog.

To get info about what is happening on your machine use the following 3 approaches:
1. Monitor the files in `/var/log` that are written by `rsyslogd`.
2. Use the `journalctl` command to get more detailed information from the journal.
3. Use the `systemctl status <unit>` command to get a short overview of the last significant events that have been logged by Systemd units through `journald`.


 


# Understanding Log File Contents
```bash
Aug  8 06:23:56 RHCSA-MAIN systemd[1955]: Started Virtual filesystem metadata service.
Aug  8 06:23:58 RHCSA-MAIN chronyd[805]: Can't synchronise: no majority
Aug  8 06:24:00 RHCSA-MAIN chronyd[805]: Selected source 167.248.49.102 (2.rhel.pool.ntp.org)
Aug  8 06:24:00 RHCSA-MAIN chronyd[805]: Source 167.248.49.102 replaced with 2602:fe2e:3:d:f9:c7ff:fef5:379c (2.rhel.pool.ntp.org)
Aug  8 06:24:04 RHCSA-MAIN PackageKit[1467]: uid 1000 is trying to obtain org.freedesktop.packagekit.system-sources-refresh auth (only_trusted:0)
Aug  8 06:24:04 RHCSA-MAIN PackageKit[1467]: uid 1000 obtained auth for org.freedesktop.packagekit.system-sources-refresh
Aug  8 06:24:08 RHCSA-MAIN systemd[1]: Starting Fingerprint Authentication Daemon...
Aug  8 06:24:08 RHCSA-MAIN systemd[1]: Started Fingerprint Authentication Daemon.
Aug  8 06:24:09 RHCSA-MAIN journal[1467]: Skipping refresh of media: Cannot update read-only repo
Aug  8 06:24:09 RHCSA-MAIN journal[1467]: Skipping refresh of media: Cannot update read-only repo

```

-   **Date and time**: Every log message starts with a timestamp. For filtering purposes, the timestamp is written as military time.
-   **Host**: The host the message originated from. This is relevant because rsyslogd can be configured to handle remote logging as well.
-   **Service or process name**: The name of the service or process that generated the message.
-   **Message conten**t: The content of the message, which contains the exact message that has been logged.

### Logger
Logger allows the user to send logs directly to rsyslog from the command line or script


# Configuring rsyslogd
To make sure that the information that needs to be logged is written to the location where you want to find it, you can configure the rsyslogd service through the `/etc/rsyslog.conf` file. In this file, you find different sections that allow you to specify where and how information should be written. The `/etc/rsyslog.conf` file is the central location where rsyslogd is configured. From this file, the content of the directory /etc/rsyslog.d is included. Below are the contents of `/etc/rsyslog.conf`:

-   **#### MODULES ####**: rsyslogd is modular. Modules are included to enhance the supported features in rsyslogd.
-   **#### GLOBAL DIRECTIVES ####**: This section is used to specify global parameters, such as the location where auxiliary files are written or the default timestamp format.  
-   **#### RULES ####**: This is the most important part of the rsyslog.conf file. It contains the rules that specify what information should be logged to which destination.



# Rotating Log Files
To prevent syslog messages from filling up, you should rotate your logs. This means that when a certain threshold has been reached, the old log file is closed and a new log file is opened.  Configuration can be found in `/etc/logrotate.conf`. If specific files need specific settings, you can create a configuration file for that file in `/etc/logrotate.d`.

>[!WARNING] Once a log file is rotated, it's gone. 


# Working With journald
The systemd-journald service stores log messages in the journal, a binary file that is temporarily stored in the file `/run/log/journal`. If you want to see the last messages that have been logged, you can use `journalctl -f`, which shows the last lines of the messages where new log lines are automatically added. You can also type journalctl and use (uppercase) G to go to the end of the journal. Also note that the search options / and ? work in the journalctl output.

# Preserving the Systemd Journal
By default, the journal is stored in the file `/run/log/journal`. The entire /run directory is used for current process status information only, which means that the journal is cleared when the system reboots. To make the journal persistent between system restarts, you should make sure that a directory `/var/log/journal` exists. Yes, all you need to do is create this directory. The system will handle the rest. 

Storing the journal permanently requires setting the Storage=auto parameter in` /etc/systemd/journal.conf`. This parameter can have different values:

-   `Storage=auto` The journal will be written on disk if the directory /var/log/journal exists.
-   `Storage=volatile` The journal will be stored only in the /run/log/ journal directory.    
-   `Storage=persistent `The journal will be stored on disk in the directory /var/log/journal. This directory will be created automatically if it doesn’t exist.
-   `Storage=none` No data will be stored, but forwarding to other targets such as the kernel log buffer or syslog will still work.

>[!WARNING]  The journal is NOT kept forever. The journal has built-in log rotation that will be used monthly. To change these settings, you can modify the file `/etc/systemd/journald.conf`.