# Understanding Containers
Containers run applications, including all of the application dependencies, but in the end, the purpose of a container is to run an application. In some cases, the application is a process that is meant to be running all the time. In other cases, the application is just a shell, or another command that runs, produces its result, and then exits.
- A container is complete package to run an application, which contains all application dependencies. 
- Containers run on top of a container engine that is offered by the host operating system. For example, Docker. 
- **System containers** are used as the foundation to build custom images, and don't come with standard applications. 

### Containers are NOT Virtual Machines
Sometimes, a container is considered to be something like a virtual machine. If you start an Ubuntu virtual machine, for instance, it starts and will keep on running until somebody comes and uses it. Containers are not virtual machines. Every container image is configured with a default command, and as just discussed, the container runs the default command and then exits as it’s done after running the command.


### Requirements
- Namespaces for isolation between processes
- Control Group for resource management
- SELinux to ensure security 
- Containers  usually run a single application
	- Multiple applications can be connected in Microservices
		- To manage multiple containers at an Enterprise level, orchestration is needed. 
		- Red Hat OpenShift, or Kubernetes, for example. 
			- Red Hat OpenShift is the RH Kubernetes distribution. it offers additional features to Kubernetes. 

# Containers on RHEL 8
- RHEL no longer offers support for Docker :(. No worries, they have new utilities
	- **podman** - Used to manage containers and container images. 
	- **buildah** - Used to create new container images
	- **skopeo** - Used to inspect, delete, copy, and sign images. 

### Rootless Containers
- If containers need to run a process on a privileged port,, they need to run with root privileges. 
- Rootless containers will run as a non-root user
	- This is actually not bad because running a container as root is dangerous. 

### Scaling Containers
In an enterprise environment, you need your containers to have additional features. For this, use OpenShift or Kubernetes. 

# Running Containers on RHEL 8
# Images
The foundation of every container is the container image. The container is a running instance of the image, where a writable layer is added to store changes made to the container. To find available images, you can use the `podman search` command.

To inspect images before pulling them, use `skopeo`
To inspect images that are available locally, use `podman`
	`podman inspect registry.redhat.io/ubi8/ubi`

### Image Housekeeping
When newer versions of images become available, the old version will be kept on your system. 
1. `podman images` - Get a list of all images
2. `podman rmi` - Remove images. 

# Registries
Container images are typically fetched from container registries, which are specified in the `/etc/containers/registries.conf` configuration file. A user who runs a rootless container can create a file `~/.config/containers/registries.conf`. In case of conflict, settings in the user-specific file will override settings in the generic file.

In the registries.conf file, you’ll find three important sections:
-   `registries.search` - lists the default registries that are used. When you search for an image, the registries are used in the order specified here. 
-   `registries.insecure` - can be used to add registries that are not secured with TLS keys.
-   `registries.block` - can be used to exclude registries that have been specified elsewhere. Using [registries.block] is useful in a user registries.conf file, to disable access to specific registries that were opened in /etc/containers/ registries.conf.



# Managing Containers

### Running Commands in a Container 
Use `podman exec` to run commands inside of containers. There are two ways to run these commands. 
1. As a one-shot 
	1. `podman exec mycontainer uname -r`
2. Interactively 
	1. `podman exec -it mycontainer /bin/bash`

### Container Ports
Rootless containers in podman run without a network address because a rootless container has insufficient privileges to allocate a network address. To make the service running in the container accessible from the outside, you need to configure  
port forwarding, where a port on the container host is used to access a port in the container application.

Use `podman run --name nginxport -d -p 8080:80 nginx` to run the nginx image as a container and make the nginx process accessible on host port 8080, which will be forwarded to the standard http port 80 on which nginx is offering its services. Don’t forget to use` sudo firewall-cmd --add-port 8080/tcp --permanent`; `sudo firewall-cmd --reload` to open the port in the firewall as well afterward! 

### Container Environment Variables 
mariadb is an example of a container that requires environment variables, so we'll be useing that as an example here. 

If a container needs environment variables to do its work, there are a few ways to figure this out:
- Just run the container without any environment variables. It will immediately stop, and the main application will generate an error message. Use `podman logs` on your container to read the log for information on what went wrong.
- Use `podman inspect` to see whether there is a usage line in the container image that tells you how to run the container.

After you’ve found out how to run the container, run it, specifying the environment variables with the `-e` option. To run a mariadb instance, for example, you  
can use `podman run -d -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=password -e MYSQL_USER=anna -e MYSQL_PASSWORD=password -e MYSQL_ DATABASE=mydb -p 3306:3306 mariadb`.

### Container Storage 
By default, when you remove a container, all modifications that were made to that container are removed also. So, if you don't want this to happen, you need to add persistent storage. 

To add persistent storage to Podman containers, you bind-mount a directory on the host operating system into the container. A bind-mount is a specific type of mount, where a directory is mounted instead of a block device.
To set up this storage solution, you need to prep first:
1. Ensure that the user account used in the container has access to the host directory, and set the SELinux context type to `container_file_t`
	1. IF the container user is the owner of the host directory, the `:Z` option can be used.
		1. `podman run -d -v /webfiles:/webfiles:Z nginx`

Okay, now we're ready to mount:
1. sudo mkdir /{DIRNAME}
2. sudo chmod o+w /{DIRNAME}
3. `sudo semanage fcontext -a -t container_file_t "/{DIRNAME}(./*)?"`

### Containers As Services 
On a standalone platform where containers are running rootless containers, systemd is needed to autostart containers. To automatically start containers in standalone situation, you can create systemd user unit files for rootless containers and manage them with `systemctl` .

In systemd, services are easily started and enabled with root permissions using commands like systemctl enable --now myservice.service. If no root permissions are available, you need to use systemctl --user. The --user option allows users to run the common systemd commands, but in user space only. This works for any service that can run without root permissions.

When systemctl --user is used, services can be automatically started  only when a user session is started. To define an exception to that, you can use the loginctl session manager, which is part of the systemd solution to enable “linger” for a specific user account. If you use `loginctl enable-linger myuser`, you enable this for the user myuser. When **linger** is enabled, systemd services that are enabled for that specific user will be started on system start, not only when the user is logging in.

#### The Process
1.  Use sudo useradd linda to create a user linda.
2.  Use sudo passwd linda to set the password for user linda.
3.  Type sudo loginctl enable-linger linda to enable the linger feature for user linda.
4.  Log in as user linda (no su or sudo).
5.  Type `mkdir -p ~/.config/systemd/user; cd ~/.config/systemd/user` to create and activate the directory where the systemd user files will be created.
6.  Use `podman run -d --name mynginx -p 8081:80 nginx` to start an nginx pod.
7.  Type `podman ps` to verify the nginx pod has been started.
8.  Create the systemd user files using `podman generate systemd --name mynginx --files`.
9.  A systemd unit file with the name `container-mynginx.service` is created.
10.  Use `vim container-mynginx.service` and change the WantedBy line such that it reads `WantedBy=default.target`.
11.  Type `systemctl --user daemon-reload` to ensure that systemd picks up the changes.
12.  Use `systemctl --user enable container-mynginx.service` to enable the systemd user service. (Do not try to start it because it has already been started!)
13.  Type `systemctl --user status container-mynginx.service` to verify the service has the state of enabled.
14.  Reboot your server, and after rebooting, verify that the container is automatically started.